 Water Bit Mask Generation via Fully Convolutional Network at the Alaska Satellite Facility


Summer 2019 Student interns at the Alaska Satellite Facility (ASF) have developed software, written in Python 3 and running on Amazon Web Services (AWS), to identify water in Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR) satellite images using a Fully Convolutional Network (FCN). The output of the FCN is a bit mask indicating the location of water in a SAR image. This project is composed of two halves; the training data generator and the FCN.

The training data generator "water_mark" uses the ASF HyP3 on demand SAR processing system to perform radiometric terrain correction (RTC) on a collection of dual-pol (VV, VH) SAR images, apply a statistical algorithm to each VV, VH pair to generate an approximation of the "ground truth" bit mask, tile and label the images and mask into 512x512 pixel tiles, then "groom" the data by removing bad image mask pairs and hand tuning masks where appropriate or possible. Currently (07/25/2019), Apx. 40 SAR granules have been processed resulting in Apx. 20 GB of high quality training Data. This training data was then uploaded to an AWS S3 bucket for convenient access.

The FCN is built with Keras, an open-source neural network library running on top of TensorFlow. The FCN uses the Unet Architecture for semantic segmentation allowing each pixel to be labelled. To allow this project to scale and meet ASF's needs the FCN can be run on an AWS EC2 instance.

The results thus far are promising, with testing and training accuracy greater than 90%. However, validation and accuracy in machine learning can be deceptively difficult to interpret; in our case the "ground truth" is unknown. To address these questions, several metrics were collected and various data visualization techniques were used: charts of accuracy vs. epoch, loss vs. epoch, and gifs of the masks developing. 

Later versions of this software could potentially be of interest to remote sensing scientists for land masking and speckle filtering.

